---
layout: post
title:  Baby's First API
subtitle: What are APIs, and how to make your own
description: API's are wonderful tools, and learning why you use them, and how to create them is incredibly valuable
date:   2018-02-05 16:11:34
categories: tutorial
featured-image: /images/posts/my-linux-config/gnome-tasks.png
thumbnail-image: /images/posts/my-linux-config/gnome-tasks.png
comments: true
author: Devin Matte
author-image: /images/devinmatte.jpg
author-bio: Second Year Software Engineering Student at Rochester Institute of Technology
---

API's are wonderful tools, and learning why you use them, and how to create them is incredibly valuable. There's thousands of APIs that are exposed to the public for use. From [GitHub](https://developer.github.com/v3/), to [Stripe](https://stripe.com/docs/api) or [Google Calendar](https://developers.google.com/google-apps/calendar/) APIs allow you to access and utilize other systems. This tutorial is going to teach you how to use, and make your own API so that you can take advantage of the power that REST provides.

## What are APIs?
API stands for Application Programming Interface. But that doesn't exactly help anyone understand what it is. An API is a communication protocol between software that allows for the transfer of data between systems.

#### The best example I can give for a use case for an API is for a simple request to a database:

Let's say you have a database on a server. Let's say you have a table of users. It has username, email, phone numbers and password hashes stored in it. Now let's say another application wants to access that information. But maybe you don't want to provide them with the raw password hash. 

|username|email|phone|passhash|
|--------|-----|-----|--------|
|matted  |matted@csh.rit.edu | 5555555555 | DehnAr%3a!gbHhhOkQQ

Let's say you also only want them to get that data if they have the username and password for the user. In this scenario you could create an API that allows for a request to be made for that information, but only returns what you want, given what you want. If a user makes a request for information without a password, you can just reject or ignore the request. 

```json
{
    "error": "Invalid Credentials"
}
```

But if provided correctly, you can return the data in whatever form you wish, and omit whatever fields you wish to omit.

```json
{
    "username": "matted",
    "email": "matted@csh.rit.edu",
    "phone": 5555555555
}
```


## What is RESTful?

From [codecademy](https://www.codecademy.com/articles/what-is-rest): In the REST architectural style, the implementation of the client and the implementation of the server can be done independently without each knowing about the other. This means that the code on the client side can be changed at any time without affecting the operation of the server, and the code on the server side can be changed without affecting the operation of the client.

REST is often confused for HTTP. They are not the same, but they do work well together. Most web-api's, specifically the one's I'll be teaching you today, are in fact HTTP.

When working with a RESTful HTTP API, there are 4 basic methods that you should learn.

- **GET** — retrieve a specific resource (by id) or a collection of resources
- **POST** — update a specific resource (by id)
- **PUT** — create a new resource
- **DELETE** — remove a specific resource by id

## Paths

First thing we should go over, is how to structure an API. 
RESTful APIs are accessed generally through simple web routes.
Think of something like `google.com/` and `google.com/search`.
You're already likely familiar with the fact that `google.com/` is the route to get the main page.

### Root
`/` is an example of the "root" path of the API. 
It's what's loaded when you go to either `google.com` or `google.com/`.

### Routes
`\search` is the route that exists in the path `google.com/search`.
When you write routes, there is no limit to the path, `/this/is/a/long/path/which/is/valid`.
You should however, try and keep your routes short and simple.
Routes should be easily understood, and generally memorable so that people are able to type it in, or understand what information will be provided simply from the URL.

## Make your Own!

To follow along, clone the [example repo](https://github.com/devinmatte/Your-First-API) and checkout the language/framework of your choice

```
git clone https://github.com/devinmatte/Your-First-API.git
git checkout [branch]
```

Options are: 

- Python with Flask: `python_flask`
- Java with Spring: `java_spring`
- PHP with Slim: `php_slim`
- Node with Express `node_express`


### Getting started

<ul id="gettingStarted" class="nav nav-tabs">
    <li class="active"><a href="#python-1" data-toggle="tab"><b>Python</b>/Flask</a></li>
    <li><a href="#java-1" data-toggle="tab"><b>Java</b>/Spring</a></li>
    <li><a href="#php-1" data-toggle="tab"><b>PHP</b>/Slim</a></li>
    <li><a href="#node-1" data-toggle="tab"><b>Node</b>/Express</a></li>
</ul>
<div class="tab-content">
<div role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane active" id="python-1">
Edit <code>__init__.py</code> and add the following route, then run <code>app.py</code> to test.
<pre><code class="python">@app.route("/", methods=["GET"])
def root():
    return "Hello World!"
</code></pre>
</div>

<div role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane" id="java-1">
<pre><code class="java">
</code></pre>
</div>

<div role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane" id="php-1">
Edit <code>routes.php</code> and add the following route, then run <code>php -S localhost:3000 -t index.php</code> to test.
<pre><code class="php">$app->get('/', function (Request $request, Response $response) {
    return $response->write("Hello World!");
});
</code></pre>
</div>

<div role="tabpanel" class="tab-pane" id="node-1">
Edit <code>app.js</code> and add the following route, then run <code>node app.js</code> to test.
<pre><code class="js">app.get('/', (req, res) => res.send('Hello World!'))
</code></pre>
</div>

</div>